# Classics Experimentation

There are a handful of cocktails that are incredibly varied, where everyone has
their own special spec (if they like making them). The Martini is a signature
example of this.

This page will detail some experimentation I've done with various classic
cocktails.

# Negroni

By far my favorite cocktail. I wrote a multiples of 1000 word essay on the
negroni and how it relates to political psychology.

I adhere to the holy trinity: 1 gin, 1 sweet vermouth, 1 Campari. I'm not
someone opposed to experimenting and dialing in, but the trinity has served me
well.

The first thing I recommend is use a good sweet vermouth. See my page on
[vermouths](spirits/vermouths.md) to help get an idea of what you'd like, but
the 3 I've liked the most over the years are Dolin Rouge, Carpano Antica, and
Cocchi Vermouth di Torino. I used to strictly use Dolin (\$14 dollars near me)
but I now stick to Cocchi. Carpano is something I splurge on occasionally, but I
find it ever so slightly overpowering.

I can't emphasize enough, the vermouth makes or breaks this drink, more so than
the gin. Honestly, I use this drink as a gin showcase, I'll put nearly any gin
in it, but without the right vermouth I don't enjoy it. I think Dolin would
probably be too weak for my taste these days, honestly.

The next thing I have to recommend: an orange slice. There seem to be two
variations on the garnish: American (orange peel, expressed), and Italian
(orange slice, dropped in). I by far prefer the slice. If you haven't tried it,
try it.

The orange slice makes the negroni much more refreshing, where the peel is good
if you want something with more bitter basey notes.

# Martini

Experimentation with martinis is a right of passage, so I won't strictly say
what's good and what isn't.

What I can say is I find dry vermouth to be too weak. I definitely go 2:1, and
if I was using Noilly Prat or Dolin Blanc I'd probably go closer to 1:1 these
days. But I can't recommend enough trying Cocchi Americano in a Martini. I am
not sure if this still qualifies as a Martini but I don't see why it shouldn't.
It might be closer to a gin Vesper, but I'm going to keep calling it a Martini.

I recently discovered the joys of the "Scotch Martini," or at least, a smoky
martini: drop a quarter ounce of a peaty scotch (Ardbeg 10, Lagavullin,
Laphroig) into the martini and, assuming you're not averse to peat, you will
thank me. It's incredible.

I tend to garnish with a lemon peel, though I think I might prefer the orange,
it's just more expensive.

One final suggestion: what I've taken to calling the Improved Martini, which is
simply an absinthe rinse. An Improved Scotch Martini with Cocchi Americano is a
thing to die for.

# Old Fashioned

My brother likes mint syrup and orange bitters in his but he's never turned his
nose up at mine.

I stick pretty close to the Death & Co. version in Cocktail Codex (see my [Old
Fashioned template page](old_fashioned.md)). I actually have their exact
ingredients, though I will use any bourbon.

I find the OF to be similar to the Martini in its ability to showcase a bourbon.
So I've done OFs with any bourbon I want to try. I don't like sipping liquor
neat, so that's how I taste it.

I will say, Noah's Mill is one of my favorite OF's so far, but my brother would
be shocked if I said I used a \$65 bourbon in an OF. Fuck 'im.
