# Tips & Techniques

## Fundamental Law of Cocktails

From Liquid Intelligence by Dave Arnold:

> THERE IS NO CHILLING WITHOUT DILUTION, AND THERE IS NO DILUTION WITHOUT
> CHILLING.

Dave Arnold spends sometime proving this, and it's fairly convincing. Ice melts,
though, and glasses on the rocks will get watered down and will warm up. So it's
not a fundamental law across time. More like a law of shaking and stirring.

## Stirring

Generally if a drink does not contain citrus or egg it's stirred. I believe this
is because stirring does not dilute as much, and the only reason we shake is
because shaking helps incorporate the citrus. I've also never seen an egg drink
without citrus.

If the drink will be served over ice, under stir so that it will continue to
evolve in the glass and not be over diluted by the end and taste watery. It
extends the lifetime of the drink.

If the drink will be served up, or sans ice, overstir. It will not evolve in the
glass except to warm up, so its best to properly dilute it.

Larger ice takes longer to dilute.

## Shaking

Pretty much a must if citrus is in the drink. Otherwise, please stir.

The best way to shake is with one big 2 inch ice cube and some smaller agitator
cubes. Most YouTube cocktailers add one big cube to the shaker, and then with a
barspoon crack a second one into pieces in the shaker. This is somewhat
annoying, but proven to work the best by Dave Arnold.

The next best way is with one big cube and a couple little cubes. If you use
this or the barspoon-cracking method you really only have to shake for ten
seconds.

After that, a bunch of little cubes works too, but you have to shake longer and
the drink will not have as much body. Aim for around 15 seconds.

Finally, with crushed ice, don't shake too long, you'll over dilute the drink.

There are other shaking techniques than the typical shaking

## Double Straining

My strongest recommendation is to nearly always double strain. Use a hawthorne
strainer and pour through a tea strainer. This technique is showcased right at
the beginning of
[this video from Cocktail Chemistry](https://youtu.be/IpHoPGNsSx4).

## Reverse Dry Shake

I have found this to be the best way to get a good foam on the drink. I get it
from [Cocktail Chemistry on YouTube](https://youtu.be/opG3tA7uxfk?t=70).

First shake over ice WITHOUT the egg white. Follow the tips in Shaking above.

Then break open the shaker (you should be using a Boston Shaker; if not, what
the hell are you doing with your life man?) and double strain the drink back
into the other half of the shaker. Dump the ice.

Add the egg white. Seal the shaker, and holding it tight (there will be no
decrease in temperature to help seal the shaker) shake, hard, for 15-25 seconds.
You really have to shake vigorously and long to make sure you incorporate the
egg white fully.

Strain into a cocktail glass. Enjoy.

Update: Reverse Dry Shake produces an airier foam that doesn't seem to last as
long. This is largely preference. I prefer a normal dry shake but sometimes
after the dry shake-wet shake cycle, when I pour the drink into the glass the
foam may be almost non-existent. Just dump the cocktail back in an empty shaker
and give it a quick dry shake. It will be fine.

## Rimming

Do not rim the inside of the glass. The best way to do this is with citrus.

Rub exposed citrus pulp along the outside of the glass. Then gently dip it into
whatever powder you're using. Don't roll too far. Maybe an inch. Lift the glass
each time. That is to say, don't roll all the way around because it won't work
very well. Only do the outside. There shouldn't be any rimmer inside the glass.

To see an example of this technique, watch
[Greg from How to Drink](https://youtu.be/c9tMbVU9ymY?t=386).

## Saline Solution

This is a pretty damn essential ingredient to EVERY cocktail. It is amazingly
helpful. I have tried drinks without it, remembered I forgot it, added it and
waited a minute, and then tasted a completely different drink. It makes nearly
every flavor pop. Don't believe me, see
[this article from Punch](https://punchdrink.com/articles/case-for-adding-salt-to-all-cocktail-recipes/).

I use a dropper bottle with a 10:1 water to salt ratio. Literally just combine
the water and salt in a glass and stir until it's fully incorporated. Then I add
about 5-6 drops to every cocktail. It works with as little as 2-3. I have yet to
add too much, and occasionally I do 10 drops.

Most recipes call for a 5:1 ratio. I have not made that yet. I have also seen
4:1. I have not experimented enough to see what is ideal. All I can say is, get
yourself a goddamn dropper bottle and make some saline solution. Never forget
it.

## Flame a twist

Light a match, wait for the head to burn out (otherwise it will taste
chemically), then hold it over your drink and squeeze the twist into it. The
juices will flame up and add a delicious smokiness to the drink.

## Perfect Peels

Y-Peelers are the general industry preference but I find they suck and go bad
fast. Morgenthaler recommended going with a \$10 Boska cheese slicer. Works
magic.

## Shaking without a shaker

Morgenthaler also recommends getting a blender and using it instead of a shaker.
I'm still experimenting with this technique. I bought a Vintage Waring 14-speed
Blendor from the sixties on Ebay for 60ish bucks and it is awesome. But with egg
drinks I've found it significantly over-froths even on low settings. Still needs
adjustment.

## Bitter Garnishes on Foam Drinks

It's often great to have a nice little design like in a latte on an egg-frothed
drink like a whiskey sour. Just get a nice little dropper bottle and put your
bitters in that. Then you can make some nice dropper designs. Use a toothpick to
draw lines through the dots for a nicer garnish. Works well for a heart.

#cocktails

